And then, thought Clarissa
Dalloway, what a morning--fresh as if issued to children on a beach.

What a lark! What a plunge! For so it had always seemed to her, when,
with a little squeak of the hinges, which she could hear now, she had
burst open the French windows and plunged at Bourton into the open air.
How fresh, how calm, stiller than this of course, the air was in the
early morning; like the flap of a wave; the kiss of a wave; chill and
sharp and yet (for a girl of eighteen as she then was) solemn, feeling
as she did, standing there at the open window, that something awful was
about to happen; looking at the flowers, at the trees with the smoke
winding off them and the rooks rising, falling; standing and looking

Clarissa
was positive, a particular hush, or solemnity; an indescribable
pause; a suspense (but that might be her heart, affected, they said,
by influenza) before Big Ben strikes. There! Out it boomed. First
a warning, musical; then the hour, irrevocable. The leaden circles
dissolved in the air. Such fools we are, she thought, crossing Victoria
Street. For Heaven only knows why one loves it so, how one sees it so,
making it up, building it round one, tumbling it, creating it every
moment afresh; but the veriest frumps, the most dejected of miseries
sitting on doorsteps (drink their downfall) do the same; can’t be dealt
with, she felt positive, by Acts of Parliament for that very reason:
they love life. In people’s eyes, in the swing, tramp, and trudge; in
the bellow and the uproar; the carriages, motor cars, omnibuses, vans,
sandwich men shuffling and swinging; brass bands; barrel organs; in the
triumph and the jingle and the strange high singing of some aeroplane
overhead was what she loved; life; London; this moment of June.

“I love walking in London,” said Mrs. Dalloway. “Really it’s better
than walking in the country.”

June had drawn out every leaf on the trees. The mothers of Pimlico
gave suck to their young. Messages were passing from the Fleet to the
Admiralty. Arlington Street and Piccadilly seemed to chafe the very air
in the Park and lift its leaves hotly, brilliantly, on waves of that
divine vitality which Clarissa loved. To dance, to ride, she had adored
all that.

How much she wanted it--that people should look pleased
as she came in, Clarissa thought and turned and walked back towards
Bond Street, annoyed, because it was silly to have other reasons for
doing things. Much rather would she have been one of those people like
Richard who did things for themselves, whereas, she thought, waiting
to cross, half the time she did things not simply, not for themselves;

It is probably the Queen, thought Mrs. Dalloway, coming out of
Mulberry’s with her flowers; the Queen. And for a second she wore a
look of extreme dignity standing by the flower shop in the sunlight
while the car passed at a foot’s pace, with its blinds drawn. The Queen
going to some hospital; the Queen opening some bazaar, thought Clarissa.

Clarissa guessed; Clarissa knew of course; she had seen something
white, magical, circular, in the footman’s hand, a disc inscribed
with a name

And Clarissa, too, gave a party. She stiffened a
little; so she would stand at the top of her stairs.

“What are they looking at?” said Clarissa Dalloway to the maid who
opened her door.

“Fear no more,” said Clarissa. Fear no more the heat o’ the sun; for
the shock of Lady Bruton asking Richard to lunch without her made the
moment in which she had stood shiver, as a plant on the river-bed feels
the shock of a passing oar and shivers: so she rocked: so she shivered.

“Dear!” said Clarissa

seeing the delicate pink
face of the woman who was that very night to give a party; of Clarissa
Dalloway; of herself.

Strange, she thought, pausing on the landing, and assembling that
diamond shape, that single person, strange how a mistress knows the
very moment, the very temper of her house!

“Oh Lucy,” she said, “the silver does look nice!”

“And how,” she said, turning the crystal dolphin to stand straight,
“how did you enjoy the play last night?” “Oh, they had to go before
the end!” she said. “They had to be back at ten!” she said. “So they
don’t know what happened,” she said. “That does seem hard luck,” she
said (for her servants stayed later, if they asked her). “That does
seem rather a shame,” she said, taking the old bald-looking cushion in
the middle of the sofa and putting it in Lucy’s arms, and giving her a
little push, and crying:

“Take it away! Give it to Mrs. Walker with my compliments! Take it
away!” she cried.

But, said Mrs. Dalloway, she had enough on her hands already, quite
enough of her own to do without that.

“But, thank you, Lucy, oh, thank you,” said Mrs. Dalloway, and thank
you, thank you, she went on saying (sitting down on the sofa with her
dress over her knees, her scissors, her silks), thank you, thank you,
she went on saying in gratitude to her servants generally for helping
her to be like this, to be what she wanted, gentle, generous-hearted.
Her servants liked her.

Clarissa (but never would she have a moment any more), I shall go and
see her at Ealing. For she was a character, thought Clarissa, a real
artist. She thought of little out-of-the-way things; yet her dresses
were never queer

Heavens, the front-door bell!” exclaimed Clarissa, staying her needle.
Roused, she listened.

“Who can--what can,” asked Mrs. Dalloway (thinking it was outrageous
to be interrupted at eleven o’clock on the morning of the day she
was giving a party), hearing a step on the stairs. She heard a hand
upon the door. She made to hide her dress, like a virgin protecting
chastity, respecting privacy

for a single second she could not remember what
he was called! so surprised she was to see him, so glad, so shy, so
utterly taken aback to have Peter Walsh come to her unexpectedly in
the morning! (She had not read his letter.)

“How heavenly it is to see you again!” she exclaimed.

He’s very well dressed, thought Clarissa;

Now of course, thought Clarissa, he’s enchanting! perfectly enchanting!
Now I remember how impossible it was ever to make up my mind--and why
did I make up my mind--not to marry him? she wondered, that awful
summer?

“But it’s so extraordinary that you should have come this morning!” she
cried, putting her hands, one on top of another, down on her dress.

What an extraordinary habit that was, Clarissa thought; always playing
with a knife. Always making one feel, too, frivolous; empty-minded;
a mere silly chatterbox, as he used. But I too, she thought, and,
taking up her needle, summoned, like a Queen whose guards have fallen
asleep and left her unprotected (she had been quite taken aback by this
visit--it had upset her) so that any one can stroll in and have a look
at her where she lies with the brambles curving over her, summoned
to her help the things she did; the things she liked; her husband;

Clarissa sat very upright; drew in her breath.

“In love!” she said. That he at his age should be sucked under in his
little bow-tie by that monster! And there’s no flesh on his neck; his
hands are red; and he’s six months older than I am! her eye flashed
back to her; but in her heart she felt, all the same, he is in love. He
has that, she felt; he is in love.

(All the same, he is in love, thought Clarissa.)

She flattered him; she fooled him, thought Clarissa; shaping the woman,
the wife of the Major in the Indian Army, with three strokes of a
knife. What a waste! What a folly! All his life long Peter had been
fooled like that; first getting sent down from Oxford; next marrying
the girl on the boat going out to India; now the wife of a Major in the
Indian Army--thank Heaven she had refused to marry him! Still, he was
in love; her old friend, her dear Peter, he was in love.

And Clarissa had leant forward, taken his hand, drawn him to her,
kissed him,--actually had felt his face on hers before she could down
the brandishing of silver flashing--plumes like pampas grass in a
tropic gale in her breast, which, subsiding, left her holding his hand,
patting his knee and, feeling as she sat back extraordinarily at her
ease with him and light-hearted, all in a clap it came over her, If I
had married him, this gaiety would have been mine all day!

Take me with
you, Clarissa thought impulsively, as if he were starting directly upon
some great voyage; and then, next moment, it was as if the five acts of
a play that had been very exciting and moving were now over and she had
lived a lifetime in them and had run away, had lived with Peter, and
it was now over.

Now it was time to move, and, as a woman gathers her things together,
her cloak, her gloves, her opera-glasses, and gets up to go out of the
theatre into the street, she rose from the sofa and went to Peter.

“Here is my Elizabeth,” said Clarissa, emotionally, histrionically,
perhaps.

“Peter! Peter!” cried Clarissa, following him out on to the landing.
“My party to-night! Remember my party to-night!” she cried, having to
raise her voice against the roar of the open air, and, overwhelmed by
the traffic and the sound of all the clocks striking, her voice crying
“Remember my party to-night!” sounded frail and thin and very far away
as Peter Walsh shut the door.

Clarissa
had said, imitating her, and she never stopped talking. On and on she
went, on and on.

Clarissa loved riding--and an old coachman

 But Clarissa sucked it all in; thought it so honest of him;
so independent of him; Heaven knows if she didn’t think him the most
original mind she’d ever met!

(so did Clarissa herself; she never lounged
in any sense of the word; she was straight as a dart, a little rigid
in fact). She said they had a kind of courage which the older she
grew the more she respected. In all this there was a great deal of
Dalloway, of course; a great deal of the public-spirited, British
Empire, tariff-reform, governing-class spirit, which had grown on her,
as it tends to do.

 all that interminable traffic that women of her sort
keep up; but she did it genuinely, from a natural instinct.

And of course she enjoyed life immensely. It was her nature to enjoy
(though goodness only knows, she had her reserves; it was a mere
sketch, he often felt, that even he, after all these years, could make
of Clarissa). Anyhow there was no bitterness in her; none of that
sense of moral virtue which is so repulsive in good women. She enjoyed
practically everything. If you walked with her in Hyde Park now it
was a bed of tulips, now a child in a perambulator, now some absurd
little drama she made up on the spur of the moment. (Very likely, she
would have talked to those lovers, if she had thought them unhappy.)
She had a sense of comedy that was really exquisite, but she needed
people, always people, to bring it out, with the inevitable result that
she frittered her time away, lunching, dining, giving these incessant
parties of hers, talking nonsense, sayings things she didn’t mean,
blunting the edge of her mind, losing her discrimination. There she
would sit at the head of the table taking infinite pains with some old
buffer who might be useful to Dalloway--they knew the most appalling
bores in Europe--or in came Elizabeth and everything must give way to
_her_. She was at a High School, at the inarticulate stage last time he
was over, a round-eyed, pale-faced girl, with nothing of her mother in
her, a silent stolid creature, who took it all as a matter of course,
let her mother make a fuss of her, and then said “May I go now?” like
a child of four; going off, Clarissa explained, with that mixture of
amusement and pride which Dalloway himself seemed to rouse in her,
to play hockey. And now Elizabeth was “out,”

Clarissa always said that Lady Bruton did not like her.

Clarissa had wonderful energy.

he put them in vases on
the mantelpiece. How lovely they looked! she said. And was it amusing,
she asked?

“And it came over me ‘
I might have married you,’” she said, thinking
of Peter sitting there in his little bow-tie; with that knife, opening
it, shutting it. “Just as he always was, you know.”

Clarissa thought the roses
absolutely lovely; first bunched together; now of their own accord
starting apart.

“Kilman arrives just as we’ve done lunch,” she said. “Elizabeth turns
pink. They shut themselves up. I suppose they’re praying.”

“In a mackintosh with an umbrella,” said Clarissa.

“But why should I ask all the dull women in London to my parties?” said
Clarissa. And if Mrs. Marsham gave a party, did _she_ invite her guests?

And there is a dignity in people; a solitude; even between husband and
wife a gulf; and that one must respect, thought Clarissa, watching
him open the door; for one would not part with it oneself, or take
it, against his will, from one’s husband, without losing one’s
independence, one’s self-respect--something, after all, priceless.


Clarissa was really shocked. This a Christian--this woman! This woman
had taken her daughter from her! She in touch with invisible presences!
Heavy, ugly, commonplace, without kindness or grace, she know the
meaning of life!

At this dwindling of the monster, Clarissa laughed. Saying good-bye,
she laughed.

Off they went together, Miss Kilman and Elizabeth, downstairs.

With a sudden impulse, with a violent anguish, for this woman was
taking her daughter from her, Clarissa leant over the bannisters and
cried out, “Remember the party! Remember our party to-night!”

Love and religion! thought Clarissa, going back into the drawing-room,
tingling all over. How detestable, how detestable they are!

How extraordinary it was, strange, yes, touching, to see the old lady
(they had been neighbours ever so many years) move away from the
window, as if she were attached to that sound, that string. Gigantic as
it was, it had something to do with her. Down, down, into the midst
of ordinary things the finger fell making the moment solemn. She was
forced, so Clarissa imagined, by that sound, to move, to go--but where?
Clarissa tried to follow her as she turned and disappeared, and could
still just see her white cap moving at the back of the bedroom. She was
still there moving about at the other end of the room. Why creeds and
prayers and mackintoshes? when, thought Clarissa, that’s the miracle,
that’s the mystery; that old lady, she meant, whom she could see going
from chest of drawers to dressing-table. She could still see her. And
the supreme mystery which Kilman might say she had solved, or Peter
might say he had solved, but Clarissa didn’t believe either of them had
the ghost of an idea of solving, was simply this: here was one room;
there another. Did religion solve that, or love?

That she did not care more about
it--for instance for her clothes--sometimes worried Clarissa, but
perhaps it was as well with all those puppies and guinea pigs about
having distemper, and it gave her a charm. And now there was this odd
friendship with Miss Kilman. Well, thought Clarissa about three o’clock
in the morning, reading Baron Marbot for she could not sleep, it proves
she has a heart.

How delightful to see you!” said Clarissa. She said it to every one.
How delightful to see you!

h dear, it was going to be a failure; a complete failure, Clarissa
felt it in her bones as dear old Lord Lexham stood there apologising
for his wife who had caught cold at the Buckingham Palace garden party.
She could see Peter out of the tail of her eye, criticising her, there,
in that corner. Why, after all, did she do these things? Why seek
pinnacles and stand drenched in fire? Might it consume her anyhow! Burn
her to cinders! Better anything, better brandish one’s torch and hurl
it to earth than taper and dwindle away like some Ellie Henderson!

The curtain with its flight of birds of Paradise blew out again. And
Clarissa saw--she saw Ralph Lyon beat it back, and go on talking. So
it wasn’t a failure after all! it was going to be all right now--her
party. It had begun. It had started. But it was still touch and go. She
must stand there for the present. People seemed to come in a rush.

And yet for her own part, it was too much of an effort. She was not
enjoying it. It was too much like being--just anybody, standing there;
anybody could do it; yet this anybody she did a little admire, couldn’t
help feeling that she had, anyhow, made this happen, that it marked a
stage, this post that she felt herself to have become, for oddly enough
she had quite forgotten what she looked like, but felt herself a stake
driven in at the top of her stairs. Every time she gave a party she
had this feeling of being something not herself, and that every one
was unreal in one way; much more real in another. It was, she thought,
partly their clothes, partly being taken out of their ordinary ways,
partly the background, it was possible to say things you couldn’t say
anyhow else, things that needed an effort; possible to go much deeper.
But not for her; not yet anyhow.

“How delightful to see you!” she said. Dear old Sir Harry! He would
know every one.

And what was so odd about it was the sense one had as they came up the
stairs one after another, Mrs. Mount and Celia, Herbert Ainsty, Mrs.
Dakers--oh and Lady Bruton!

“How awfully good of you to come!” she said, and she meant it--it was
odd how standing there one felt them going on, going on, some quite
old, some....

_What_ name? Lady Rosseter? But who on earth was Lady Rosseter?

She had the simplest egotism, the most open desire to be thought first
always, and Clarissa loved her for being still like that. “I can’t
believe it!” she cried, kindling all over with pleasure at the thought
of the past.

“They won’t tell us their stories,” said Clarissa.

And really Clarissa’s eyes filled with tears. Her mother, walking in a
garden! But alas, she must go.



